RFC 253: CDK Metadata v2 (#254)
aws/aws-cdk-rfcs: text/0253-cdk-metadata-v2.md

---
feature name: CDK Metadata v2
start date: 2020-09-23
rfc pr: (leave this empty)
related issue: #253
---

> # Abstract

Author: Hmm I thought this term was commonly understood to mean that, but sure I'll use Summary instead

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_(summary)

The CDK Metadata resource will start tracking individual constructs used in a
Stack's synthesis. For every construct used in a Stack from an AWS-authored
library we will collect the library name, version and qualified class name
(using a generated lookup table to obtain submodule names) and submit these
to the metadata resource in a gzipped blob.

# Motivation

> The goal of CDK Metadata is twofold:

Author: I was intending to describe "business metrics" in a general sense (as distinct from security motivations for version tracking), and then a legitimate example use case for business metrics.

> * Track what library versions people are using, so that if there are severy (security)

Author: I'm not going to say "when" here.

  problems with a library, we can contact them in a targeted fashion and suggest
  they upgrade.
* See what construct libraries are being used by people to inform future development

>   activities (example insight: are there areas where people are using L1s

Author: Again `identify` implies to me that this is definitely true, whereas my phrasing was intended to keep the option open that there might not be any.

  instead of L2s, signaling the need to invest more effort into L2
  development).

The current CDK Metadata is based on libraries loaded into the NodeJS process. When
we move to CDK v2, the entire CDK library will be vended as one library, destroying
our ability to measure in the same way.

At the same time, our current method fails in the face of multiple distinct
stacks in the same application. For example, in the case of a CDK Pipelines
application, the `@aws-cdk/pipelines` library would be counted `N+1` times:
in addition to the pipeline stack itself, once for every environment deployed
via that pipeline because the library happened to be in memory while those

> stacks were being synthesized.

Author: Not sure that I agree. Let's say a CDK Pipelines app contains a `PipelineStack` and an `ApiGateway` stack (the latter to be deployed using the former).

Would you prefer this be counted as:

* 1 time a stack using `@aws-cdk/pipelines` (the `PipelineStack`)
* 1 time a stack using `@aws-cdk/api-gateway` (the `ApiGateway` stack)

Or

* 2 times a stack using `@aws-cdk/pipelines` (both stacks, because they both happen to be synthesized by an application that uses `@aws-cdk/pipelines`).
* 2 times a stack using `@aws-cdk/api-gateway` (both stacks, because they both happen to be synthesized by an application that uses `@aws-cdk/pipelines`).

You seem to be arguing you prefer those stacks be counted as the latter, but I'm not sure that would be all that intuitive to most people.

We therefore need to move to a more fine-grained tracking system: a stack
will report the individual constructs used to synthesize that stack.

We will retain the existing filter that we will only collect information
about constructs from AWS-authored construct libraries. 3rd-party information
will not be collected.

# Design

There are two subproblems to address:

* Collecting construct identifiers: library name, version, and qualified class name.
* Encoding that information into the metadata resource.

> ## Collecting construct identifiers

Reviewer: Would be nice to start with an example somewhere and walk the example alongside the algorithm, or something else to that effect.

There's a few things here that I'm not entirely familiar with or why certain steps in the algorithm will work, such as "most qualified file name" and why we need to crawl up the inheritance hierarchy.

We need a sufficiently unique string representation of a construct('s class). Since

> we don't have manual annotation of construct class types at the moment, we will

Author: I don't mean anything. I literally only mean that a human must type some code somewhere to indicate the construct type. Haven't gotten into the mechanism yet and since I don't think we want any solution that requires human annotation, I don't want to spend any more cycles on thinking up a plausible mechanism to do this only to then discard it.

have to make do with the reflection capabilities provided by NodeJS.

* We can get the simple class name by reading `obj.constructor.name`.
* We can find the file a class is defined in by by examining `require.cache[...].exports` and
  which one the class (`object.constructor`) is in. If the class is non-exported
  (such as an `class Import implements IBucket { ... }`) it will not show up though, and we

>   won't be able to figure out what file it's from.

Author: The solution is human annotation.

The second question is a good one.

  * A constructor may be in multiple module's `exports` (because of
    re-exporting). If it is, take the one with the most qualified filename.
* We crawl up the inheritance hierarchy to find the first class that is exported in this way.

>   For unrecognized classes, we'll end up seeing `Construct`.

Reviewer: Is unrecognized classes the same as the previously mentioned non-exported constructs?

* We can find the package a class is from by crawling up the directory tree from the filename
  we identified and looking for `package.json`, getting the `name` and `version` from that file.

### Submodule names

The only thing we can't get from this is a qualified "submodule" name which is going to
become relevant in the monolibrary v2, where both the EKS and ECS submodules have a `Cluster` class,

> for example, which are otherwise indistinguishable apart from the filename. We also cannot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example, which are otherwise indistinguishable apart from the file path. We also cannot
```

completely rely on the v2 (monocdk) directory structure, as this lookup also needs to work
for non-v2 AWS-vended libraries such as the `@aws-solutions-constructs` libraries.

Class name | File name | Desired identifier
--|--|--
Cluster | .../node_modules/aws-cdk-lib/lib/aws-ecs/lib/cluster.js | aws-cdk-lib.aws_ecs.Cluster@2.1.0
Cluster | .../node_modules/aws-cdk-lib/lib/aws-eks/lib/cluster.js | aws-cdk-lib.aws_eks.Cluster@2.1.0
LambdaToSqs | .../node_modules/@aws-solutions-constructs/aws-lambda-sqs/lib/index.js | @aws-solutions-constructs/aws-lambda-sqs.LambdaToSqs@1.63.0

It would be nice if we used submodule naming that's consistent with the jsii
naming. There is nothing in the jsii manifest that could reliably be used for
this, but we can use an additional lookup table that can be generated by the
monocdk/v2 build tool, as that is in charge of the submodule names anyway.

> There will be a `submodules.json` next to `package.json` with the following structure:

Author: Ooooohh I like that! Good call!

```
{
  "lib/aws-ecs": "aws_ecs",
  "lib/aws-eks": "aws_eks",
  ...
}
```

Which is used to map subdirectories to submodule names. Absence of this file indicates no submodule names
need to be inserted.

The first matching directory found will be used, so should we ever need a
situation to support submodules-in-submodules, we can make use of the fact
that JSON dictionaries are ordered and make sure the deeper directories occur
first.

> Implementation note: looking up the source file from a class is a potentially
> expensive operation as it takes a linear scan through all sources for every class.
> We should build a reverse index in order to speed this up.

## Metadata resource encoding

A rough estimate of the maximum number of constructs used in a stack will be
about 400 (maximum of 200 L1s with a corresponding L2 wrapper). We will

> therefore need to encode roughly 400 strings of the form

Reviewer 2: That's the worst case, right? We aren't encoding all 400 in each stack?

Author: That's the worst case, correct.

`@aws-solutions-constructs/aws-lambda-sqs.LambdaToSqs@1.63.0`.

The longest overall type in the current monocdk is
`monocdk-experiment.aws_cognito.CfnUserPoolRiskConfigurationAttachment.CompromisedCredentialsRiskConfigurationTypeProperty`
(121 characters), the longest construct class name is
`monocdk-experiment.aws_ecs_patterns.ApplicationMultipleTargetGroupsFargateService`
(81 characters).

If an identifier is estimated to be a maximum of 100 bytes (which seems
reasonable be plenty of room) the resulting data set will be ~40kB.

We can encode the elements as a list straight in the template, but it will
take up a lot of space in the template: vertical space while looking at it,
as well as bytes that count toward the template size (maximum of 460kB).

Experiments with a random sampling of 400 resources from the list of classes:

> | Description | Raw size | Base64ed size |

Reviewer: Table is not rendered correctly.

Nit: could make this ascii tables, i.e., cells padded with whitespace, so it's easier to read in markdown format as well.

|--|--|
| Plaintext | 23k | - |
| gzipped | 3.6k | 4.8k |
| Zopfli | 3.4k | 4.6k |
| Bloom Filter (1% error) | 720b | 960b |
| Tree-encoded (plaintext) | 7.4k | - |

> | Tree-encoded gzipped | 3.0k | 4.0k |

Reviewer: 4-5K seems like reasonable amount of metadata to be added. What does this look like in terms of percentage of the template's size?

Are you happy with these numbers?

        5rvUi8csxJdg0KdbDuGgPLXd3i6P+lNATxkIw/w1qYnFuJrxivch+hTKvGSawkxlmQODMcmLansY1YneSjNQ30Gk2abblxBtnWgNXkYu2LLHvYxj1zw6SWyy
        0vMZeiuOzctgKQ7gMfdKWPjJLs/G2CvXmBAnxXv2KzowZxwW0tn4UB3f3/qO991KZWO5QSF6eZKAEWsB+ZyJjw8woqhGG14qKAH4nTrjubMZCyhdLKRhhU+a
        vRbNgi9AM+faMtobynENpISJ2mxTwZfwe1Tcy2f/VZ0gV37G1QKW/GeYZD8smlLv/BTrdb0JT238rXdLbDdQfaZJURwyCH0b6NuZqedfrJ7J7fLRFOweCyWN
        9C6ysN6r5aRlt+6/LgqDxGUSeP3lBDJHyl0G/VJzdGQ/ph4rNyFutAyZiGw+NS0Xy2k+Lj722pBGiiTkmqG52jgVy9gwCR+Qx3iYS0LwlEzUtpvwd9Evqjzy
        1RHh+KehLsry4s8poRwVw9f55yvaR3swoXDcZg4qUeIwesj1Q99FuVa0iHPR88CxOQQtn/M0OLhvycrwNQs47KJ6ZPhonZFw7DRJxZVSGShXJtHLouTzVAyB
        Tcb6JLsH831taVm6w3Zjny5t4MOtJbwo0yELp/JTOGLXrnqv62gRLQxUEDCQLl3YwPi2rvnHAfdP1ui4cNteKFyASguTUUyko4eCdYbP7nkkSNmQ7MVh807U
        IFWKnOgczoUf+wNUgLcFOl48yLziJSBDGw0hpN5jaZwELR6AkhizgLORMh1MAux759Y8jqyK/oMZwImJHz0DSCp8KksnI6h14WYGwO/gt68rzcLLjH8pHuI3
        wKVE/HOCgIQrRofRC0suQYuRg8T3OdNGnYRCKHIdgiLIMChV+y7NS+bxfnx8CSbXytQkXLx3iX9OSl+OmlTeeQY5awKMNM/dScR7tpbE8tmEXvBFgcqnTUUs
        nW5r/rjfQtFwk5w+1cifgmylq45Nk8al8K5Y4aur
```

We should also prefix with an identifier or version number for the encoding

> strategy so that we are free to change it in the future.

Reviewer: Yes! If we apply compression & encoding, we should treat it as a protocol.

Worth its own section.

## Metadata resource decoding

Decoding will happen on the receiving end before the data hits long-term storage,
in order to make consuming it as trivial as possible. There is no need to be frugal
with bits anymore once the data hits an AWS datacenter.

# Extensions

We will be able more information into additional fields of the metadata resource.
Size of template, number of resources are obvious candidates.

# Unresolved questions

- How acceptable is the giant base64-encoded blob in the template? If we want
  to cut down on it, what clever strategies can we come up with?

# Implementation Plan

This can be implemented in v1 already, no need to wait for v2.

* Update metadata service backend to accept new `Constructs` field. This is where
  decoding should happen back to a flat list again.
* Update canary to exercise new field.

> * Update reporting tool to report on new information.

Reviewer 2: Is the new metrics extraction format going to be backwards compatible? There are other teams consuming the data now, which will complicate releasing the changes if not.

* Add submodule-map generator to monocdk and v2 metapackages.
* Emit both fields in the metadata resource
* Verify metrics are coming in
* Remove the old `Modules` field from the metadata resource.

> # Appendix 1: Reference implementation for tree-encoding used above

Reviewer 2: Don't really understand what this code is doing, or why it's necessary in the RFC.

Author: Might come in useful for the final implementation.

application, each using a single construct library, then we will count both
construct libraries as "having been used" for both stacks (because they were
loaded into memory at the time the stacks were synthesized).

Though not limited to, this becomes even more pronounced in the case of a CDK
Pipelines application: the `@aws-cdk/pipelines` library would be counted
`N+1` times. In addition to the pipeline stack itself, once for every
environment deployed via that pipeline because the library happened to be in
memory while those stacks were being synthesized.

We therefore need to move to a more fine-grained tracking system: a stack
will report the individual constructs used to synthesize that stack.

We will retain the existing behavior that we will only collect information
about constructs from AWS-authored construct libraries. 3rd-party information
will not be collected.

We will *not* collect counts of each construct used, we will just record its
presence. Collecting more and more information is starting to feel invasive
(this is still customer application code we are collecting metrics on), and I
don't feel comfortable with that.

# Glossary

> **Construct**: an abstract, reusable specification of Cloud Infrastructure.
> In practice, implemented by a `class`
> **Construct type**: same as "Construct".
> **Construct instance**: a concrete single definition of a construct. In
> practice, a class instance.
> **Construct identifier**: a string describing a specific version of a
> *construct.
> **RTTI**: Run-Time Type Information; a mechanism by which a compiler emits
> information about the types it has processed which can be read by programs
> during execution, used to power reflection.

Reviewer: Fix rendering

```suggestion
**Construct**: an abstract, reusable specification of Cloud Infrastructure.
In practice, implemented by a `class`

**Construct type**: same as "Construct".

**Construct instance**: a concrete single definition of a construct. In
practice, a class instance.

**Construct identifier**: a string describing the specific version of a
construct.

**RTTI**: Run-Time Type Information; a mechanism by which a compiler emits
information about the types it has processed which can be read by programs
during execution, used to power reflection.
```

feature at its very simplest, and the initial feature will be to retrieve a jsii
FQN and module version from an object instance. See Appendix A for a description
of how jsii RTTI will work.

For the initial version of Metadata v2, we will simply say that the construct
identifier is whatever jsii RTTI returns.

> In the future, we may want to onboard libraries that are not jsii-libraries (either
> written in plain TypeScript or a jsii client language like Java); if that happens,
> we will add a CDK-specific core library function to attach a specific construct
> identifier to a construct instance, like
> `CdkMetadata.describe(construct, "@my/library.MyConstruct@1.2.3")`.

## Filtering down the list of construct identifiers

To protect the privacy of our users, we only want to report on 1st-party
constructs, authored and vended by AWS.

We decided against an open system, instead preferring to have a specific
allow-list of packages (or package prefixes) we are going to report on. For
example, the current list looks like this and can be found
[here](https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk/blob/master/packages/@aws-cdk/core/lib/private/runtime-info.ts):

```ts

> const WHITELIST_SCOPES = ['@aws-cdk', '@aws-solutions-konstruk', '@aws-solutions-constructs', '@amzn'];
> const WHITELIST_PACKAGES = ['aws-rfdk'];

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const ALLOWLIST_SCOPES = ['@aws-cdk', '@aws-solutions-konstruk', '@aws-solutions-constructs', '@amzn'];
const ALLOWLIST_PACKAGES = ['aws-rfdk'];
```

```

Having a PR opened against the CDK to update this list will be a clear
interaction moment between an AWS team trying to onboard with this mechanism
and us, and will prevent 3rd party authors from accidentally (or maliciously)

> onboarding themselves as well and sending us information that we don't want to
> be responsible for.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
onboarding themselves as well and sending us information that we don't have a
legitimate use-case for.
```

`monocdk-experiment.aws_ecs_patterns.ApplicationMultipleTargetGroupsFargateService`
(81 characters).

If an identifier is estimated to be a maximum of 100 bytes (which seems
reasonable be plenty of room) the resulting data set will be at most ~40kB.

We can encode the elements as a list straight in the template, but it will
take up a lot of space in the template: vertical space while looking at it,
as well as bytes that count toward the template size (maximum of 460kB).

### Compression

As an experiment, I've drawn 400 random class names from the complete list of class
names currently in monocdk; that set of class names comes to about 23kB (uncompressed).

Trying various methods of compression on it yields the following (keeping in mind
that the result of binary compression will need to be base64-encoded to transmit via
a CloudFormation template):

| Description                | Raw size    | Base64ed size |
|----------------------------|-------------|---------------|
| Plaintext                  | 23k         | -             |
| gzipped                    | 3.6k        | 4.8k          |
| Zopfli                     | 3.4k        | 4.6k          |

> | bzip2                      | 3.4k        | 4.6k          |

Reviewer 3: Curious if `zstd` is significantly different to those... Although this is probably just misplaced curiosity 🙃

Additionally - how's those configured? Default? There's a world of difference between `gzip -9` and `gzip -1` for example.

Author: It's all max compression

happy with this, but this is the most straightfoward option available.

> If we are willing to do more work, we can achieve less space used up by doing
> more esoteric things. One option would be to use a Bloom Filter, which can use
> a configurable amount of storage to achieve a configurable hit error ratio.
> For example, achieving about a 1% false positive rate would take on the order
> of about ~1k base64-encoded bytes. However, in order to extract a construct list
> from this Bloom Filter would be a considerable amount of work: we would need
> a full list of all construct available in every library and at every version,
> in order to test each construct's presence in the filter. This imposes a lot
> of complexity on the receiver, which is probably not worth the space savings.

### Analytics payload

The analytics payload itself will be preceded by an encoding scheme identifier,
followed by a `:` and the transmitted data:

```yaml
Resources:
  CDKMetadata:
    Type: AWS::CDK::Metadata
    Properties:
      Analytics: <payload-encoding>:<payload>
```

The only valid payload encodings at the moment are:

* `deflate64`: base64-encoded, gzipped data.

> * `plain`: plaintext data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `plain`: plaintext data (encoded as UTF-8).
```

The payload itself is a JSON object with `"constructs"` currently defined as the only
valid key (but can be extended in the future). Values can be prefixed with
an encoding scheme as well:

```json
{
  "constructs": "[<value-encoding>:]<prefix-encoded construct list>"
}
```

The only valid payload value encodings at the moment are:

* `afx`: affix-encoded string list (see Appendix B).
* `plain`: plaintext data.

Encoding may change the type (the encoded value is a `string` but the decoded
value is a `string[]`).

> If a value does not start with > /^[a-z0-9]{,10}:/ it is considered to

> > be not encoded (the encoding is considered to be "plain").

Reviewer 3: I'd rather consider it is invalid in that case.

If the value does not match expected format, it may well contain data that you did not expect, and may not be safe to drop in logs / storage / etc...

in order to make consuming it as trivial as possible. There is no need to be frugal
with bits anymore once the data hits an AWS datacenter.

# Extensions

We will be able more information into additional fields of the metadata resource.
Size of template, number of resources are obvious candidates.

We will be able to support non-jsii languages by adding metadata-specific APIs
to the CDK.

The jsii RTTI mechanism can be extended in the future as well, though those extensions
are out of scope of this RFC.

If we want to change the encoding of the payload in any way, we can.

If the payload grows too large and changing the encoding scheme won't be
enough to reduce it, we can transport and reference the payload as an asset.
Though, that would require us to gain read access to a customer's S3 bucket
from our account, which has security implications; it would also require a
customer to have a bootstrapped account for *every* deployment, even small
ones (though we could lift *that* limitation by hosting bootstrap buckets on behalf
of users).

# Unresolved questions

- How acceptable is the giant base64-encoded blob in the template? If we want

>   to cut down on it, what clever strategies can we come up with?

Reviewer 3: I think a key thing is we want to make sure *customers* are able to decode this data locally with great ease, so they can independently check that we are not collecting anything they would not want to disclose.

# Implementation Plan

This can be implemented in v1 already, no need to wait for v2.

> * Implement RTTI support in in jsii.
> * Inform dependent teams that they need to upgrade to the jsii version that supports
>   RTTI.
> * Update metadata service backend to accept new `Analytics` field. This is where
>   decoding should happen back to a flat list again. Metadata service should extract
>   packages from the construct list to continue emitting the old information as well.
> * Update canary to exercise new field.
> * Update metadata reporting job to report on both new and old information.
> * Update metadata resource construction implementation in CDK to switch to RTTI
>   implementation, and start emitting `Analytics` field.
> * Verify metrics are coming in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [ ] Implement RTTI support in in jsii.
* [ ] Inform dependent teams that they need to upgrade to the jsii version that supports
  RTTI.
* [ ] Update metadata service backend to accept new `Analytics` field. This is where
  decoding should happen back to a flat list again. Metadata service should extract
  packages from the construct list to continue emitting the old information as well.
* [ ] Update canary to exercise new field.
* [ ] Update metadata reporting job to report on both new and old information.
* [ ] Update metadata resource construction implementation in CDK to switch to RTTI
  implementation, and start emitting `Analytics` field.
* [ ] Verify metrics are coming in
```

> # Appendix 1: jsii Run-Time Type Information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Appendix A: jsii Run-Time Type Information
```

We will start by having the jsii compiler add FQN information to every
JavaScript class it emits.

Effectively, every class will be emitted as this in the `.js` file (the
`.d.ts` file remains unchanged).

```js
// This will be added to the top of every source file

> const vfqnSym = Symbol.for('jsii.vfqn');

Reviewer 3: I gens the naming here is 100% illustrative... But I kinda wonder why you'd not simply call that symbol `Symbol.for('jsii.rtti')`?

export class SomeClass {
  // Every class gets an additional field added to it

>   private static [vfqnSym] = 'module.SomeClass@1.2.3';

Reviewer: How do we get the module in the case of `monocdk` vs a normal jsii package? 
Please add them here.

I suppose the version comes from `package.json`?

Author: jsii has all this information already

>   private static [vfqnSym] = 'module.SomeClass@1.2.3';

Reviewer 3: How does this work for "pure" interfaces? This includes cases where we return a private type that implements a public interface?

Author: It does not. This is already explained elsewhere, and is a regrettable problem.

We *might* conceivably add a feature to `jsii-rtti` to manually annotate an anonymous object instance. But that seems like a v2 concern.

  // Regular class emits here...
}
```

We will introduce a new jsii package to access this information, called `jsii-rtti`.

It will have the following API:

```ts
class TypeInformation {
  /**
   * Get type information based on an object instance
   */
  public static forObject(object: any): TypeInformationForObject | undefined;

  /** Type FQN */
  public readonly fqn: string;

  /** Module version */
  public readonly version: string;

  /** Base class type information */

>   public readonly baseClass: TypeInformation | undefined;

Reviewer 3: Given this format, I actually think we'll be significantly better of modeling the `[Symbol.for('jsii.vfqn')]` property, so we save having to parse it out (i.e: actually set it to some object such as `{ fqn, version }`).

Author: Sure

}

interface TypeInformationForObject {
  /** Type information for the first base class that has type information */
  readonly typeInformation: TypeInformation;

  /**
   * How many classes were skipped before finding an ancestor with type information
   *
   * This number will be 0 if the object itself was an instance of a class with
   * type information.
   */

>   readonly classesSkipped: number;

Reviewer 3: What's the use-case for this information? Smells of future-proofing?

Author: Given an inheritance chain that potentially looks like this:

```
Root -> ClassA -> ClassB -> (unknown class) -> (unknown class) -> INSTANCE
                     ^
                     |
              this is the first one we can return
```

Just saying it's a `ClassB` is not accurate.

* In order to not proliferate identifier variations, it would be nice if the
  submodule names would be the same names we use in the jsii build of CDK. There's
  no strict need for them to be, but it just might ease future analysis if
  we kept that consistency.
* The mechanism should still work with libraries that don't have a submodule structure
  at all, such as non-CDK team construct libraries vended by AWS like `@aws-solutions-constructs`.

Some examples of what we want to derive:

File name                                                              | Submodule
-----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------
.../node_modules/aws-cdk-lib/lib/aws-ecs/lib/cluster.js                | "aws_ecs"
.../node_modules/aws-cdk-lib/lib/aws-eks/lib/cluster.js                | "aws_eks"
.../node_modules/@aws-solutions-constructs/aws-lambda-sqs/lib/index.js | ""

We could obtain submodule names by establishing conventions on monocdk's
directory structure, using rules as "ignore `/lib/` and replace `-` with `_`
to obtain the module name", for example. This reliance on convention seems
brittle and unflexible. Instead, let's use a configuration file.

> One possible candidate is the jsii manifest. It contains the right module names

Reviewer: I'm looking at the jsii manifest for `monocdk-experiment` and here's a snippet for eks Cluster and ecs Cluster -

```
      "name": "Cluster",
      "namespace": "aws_ecs",
      "properties": [
        {
          "docs": {
            "stability": "experimental",
            "summary": "The Amazon Resource Name (ARN) that identifies the cluster."
          },
          "immutable": true,
          "locationInModule": {
            "filename": "lib/aws-ecs/lib/cluster.ts",
            "line": 85
          },
          "name": "clusterArn",
          "overrides": "monocdk-experiment.aws_ecs.ICluster",
          "type": {
            "primitive": "string"
          }
        },
```

```
      "name": "Cluster",
      "namespace": "aws_eks",
      "properties": [
        {
          "docs": {
            "remarks": "This role also has `systems:master` permissions.",
            "stability": "experimental",
            "summary": "An IAM role with administrative permissions to create or update the cluster."
          },
          "immutable": true,
          "locationInModule": {
            "filename": "lib/aws-eks/lib/cluster.ts",
            "line": 685
          },
          "name": "adminRole",
          "type": {
            "fqn": "monocdk-experiment.aws_iam.Role"
          }
        },
```

It seems to me that from here we can derive the construct name (`name` property), module it is in (`namespace` property) and source file (`locationInModule` property).

Maybe we can update the JSII manifest to contain a `locationInModule` property for where the construct itself is, instead of individual properties.

What am I missing?

Reviewer: > what if for some reason some sister team doesn't want to, but does want tracking?

I don't see a use case yet. This will be a nice-to-have, but we probably shouldn't index on this.

> To improve loading speed by a factor of 10 I'd want us to webpack the individual modules in the future (NodeJS takes a rather long time to load each and every individual source file), which means the jsii manifest will contain lib/aws-cdk/lib/cluster.ts but the runtime path we detect will look like aws-cdk/lib/aws-eks/index.js. Now we have to map that in addition.

Isn't your current algorithm also subject to the same problems if we change how we pack our output artifacts (webpack or otherwise). Things like - determining module name from file path, using the deepest export - come to mind.

Between this comment and https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/pull/254#discussion_r500150191, an option to generate the necessary metadata at compile time or even pack time (so that the path-to-module mapping is consistent) feels worth exploring. Don't you think? At least called out as an alternative.

Reviewer: Just getting into the `cdk-metadata.json` section. Maybe this is what you're already doing that file.

example, the current list looks like this and can be found
[here](https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk/blob/master/packages/@aws-cdk/core/lib/private/runtime-info.ts):

```ts
const ALLOWLIST_SCOPES = ['@aws-cdk', '@aws-solutions-konstruk', '@aws-solutions-constructs', '@amzn'];
const ALLOWLIST_PACKAGES = ['aws-rfdk'];
```

Having a PR opened against the CDK to update this list will be a clear
interaction moment between an AWS team trying to onboard with this mechanism
and us, and will prevent 3rd party authors from accidentally (or maliciously)
onboarding themselves as well and sending us information that we don't have
a use-case for.

## Metadata resource encoding

Once we have the list of construct identifiers, we need to encode it into the
metadata resource.

The Metadata resource looks like this:

```yaml
Resources:
  CDKMetadata:
    Type: AWS::CDK::Metadata
    Properties:
      Modules: <v1 module information, deprecated by this RFC>
      Analytics: <v2 construct information, introduced by this RFC>
```

### Construct list size

The list of construct identifiers we have discovered may be sizeable. A rough
estimate of the maximum number of constructs used in a stack will be about

> 400 (maximum of 200 L1s with a corresponding L2 wrapper). We will therefore

Reviewer 4: Does it make sense to record both L2 and L1 in case the L2 is used? It actually makes sense to omit the L1 in this case I think so we can easily identify direct L1 usage (which is of particular interest for our construct library planning).

The simplest solution would be to omit L1s that are named `Resource` and that their patent construct inherits from the Resource base class.

Author: I've been on the fence about this, and trying to come up with a more general rule that would also cover this (but failing to).

But I guess it makes sense to just special-case it, you're right.

The analytics payload itself will be preceded by an encoding scheme identifier,
followed by a `:` and the transmitted data:

```yaml
Resources:
  CDKMetadata:
    Type: AWS::CDK::Metadata
    Properties:
      Analytics: <payload-encoding>:<payload>
```

The only valid payload encodings at the moment are:

* `deflate64`: base64-encoded, gzipped data.
* `plain`: plaintext data.

The payload itself is a JSON object with `"constructs"` currently defined as
the only valid key (but can be extended in the future). This protocol can be
extended by adding additional keys to the object.

Values inside the JSON object can be annotated with an encoding scheme as
well. If so, the same key followed by the text `$encoding` is added to the
same object.

```json
{
  "constructs$encoding": "<value-encoding>",
  "constructs": <construct list data>
}
```

The only valid value encodings at the moment are:

* `afx`: string list, affix-encoded as a string (see Appendix B).
* `literal`: literal JSON value.

The `$encoding` key may be missing, in which case `literal` is implied.

Encoding may change the type (for `afx` the encoded value is a `string` but the decoded
value is a `string[]`).

> 

Reviewer 4: One concern this might raise is that the metadata sent to aws will become opaque. As mitigation maybe we can emit an additional file to the cloud assembly (`analytics.json`) with the unencoded value. This way people will have visibility to it if they examine `cdk.out`

Author: We can do that, and I'm not opposed to it. I'm not convinced that it'll be necessary though, given that the behavior of the afx-encoded string will be such that if you paste it into `bash` by doing  `echo <afx-encoded-string-here>`, `bash` brace expansion is going to reconstruct the full list.

It's not like it's a secret, we're publishing the spec out in the open. 

But sure, if you feel it should be MORE readable than that, we can also emit the file.

Reviewer 4: I think it will add a level of trust

---

> feature name: CDK Metadata v2

Reviewer: Nit: would be nice to name this RFC after the problem it's solving or the solution. Something like 'construct-usage-metadata'.

construct libraries used in the CDK application that synthesized the templates.

The goal of CDK Metadata is twofold:

* Track what library versions customers are using, so that if there are severe (security)
  problems with a library, we can contact them in a targeted fashion and suggest
  they upgrade.
* Get business metrics on the adoption of CDK and its libraries. This includes # of accounts,
  \# of stacks, upgrade speed, popular construct libraries, etc.

We only collect this information for AWS-vended libraries, and customers can
opt out of the generation of this Metadata resource (and hence the collection
of their metrics).

# Motivation

The current CDK Metadata is based on libraries loaded into the NodeJS process. When
we move to CDK v2, the entire CDK library will be vended as one library, destroying
our ability to measure in the same way.

At the same time, our current method fails in the face of multiple distinct
stacks in the same application. If two different stacks exist in the same
application, each using a single construct library, then we will count both
construct libraries as "having been used" for both stacks (because they were

> loaded into memory at the time the stacks were synthesized).

Author: Your suggested rewrite would change the meaning of the sentence to something I don't intend to say.

const bucket = Bucket.fromBucketName(this, 'ImportedBucket', 'my-bucket');

// (b) Will be reported as 'Construct' since it's a user-defined class and hence
// not in scope.
const myConstruct = new MyConstruct(this, 'MyConstruct', { ... });

// (c) On the other hand, the following might be interesting to report as 'Bucket'
// (assuming the class 'extends Bucket').
const richBucket = new RichBucket(this, 'RichBucket', { ... });
```

When we pick option 2, every stack is bound to end up with the constructs `Construct`
and `Resource` (resulting form example code as in `(a)` and `(b)`), leading to noise.

Nevertheless, we will still pick option 2 (following up the inheritance chain)
in order to be able to detect situations like `(c)`.

### Representation: construct identifiers

We need a sufficiently unique string representation of each construct type to identify it.

Let's introduce the concept of a *construct identifier*. A construct
identifier has the following components:

* Library and version
* Qualified class name; the qualified class name itself consists of two components:
  * Submodule
  * Class name

Construct identifiers will be formatted like this:

```text

> library@version:[submodule.]classname

Author: There is. I moved version to the front because it compresses better though.

and `@aws-cdk/aws-eks` packages have a class named `Cluster`, so when we
bundle those packages into `aws-cdk-lib` we need a way to namespace those names,
as `aws-cdk-lib:Cluster` by itself would be ambiguous. Submodules are the namespacing
mechanism we introduced.

In order to not proliferate identifier variations, it would be nice if the
submodule names would be the same names we use in the jsii build of CDK.
There's no strict need for them to be, but it just might ease future analysis
if we kept that consistency. Specifically, we'd like an example submodule
name to be `aws_eks` instead of `aws-eks`.

Some sample construct identifiers:

```text
constructs@10.0.0:Construct
aws-cdk-lib@2.0.1:Stack
aws-cdk-lib@2.0.0:aws_eks.Cluster
@aws-solutions-constructs/aws-lambda-sqs@1.2.3:AwsLambdaSqs
```

### Collecting construct identifiers

There are two strategies for getting a construct's identifier:

* Manually annotate each construct in some way, adding a unique identifier for it
  (either by passing additional strings, adding decorators, or some other mechanism).
* Try to automatically infer the identifier components from the reflection
  capabilities available to us in NodeJS.

> 

Author: I guess we could, but there's not really any precedent in jsii currently for modifying the JavaScript classes that get emitted.

submodule names from file paths, keeping a couple of goals in mind:

* The submodule names reported here should preferably the same as jsii's
  submodule names.
* The mechanism should still work with libraries that don't have a submodule structure
  at all, such as non-CDK team construct libraries vended by AWS like `@aws-solutions-constructs`.

Some examples of what we want to derive:

File name                                                              | Submodule
-----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------
.../node_modules/aws-cdk-lib/lib/aws-ecs/lib/cluster.js                | "aws_ecs"
.../node_modules/aws-cdk-lib/lib/aws-eks/lib/cluster.js                | "aws_eks"
.../node_modules/@aws-solutions-constructs/aws-lambda-sqs/lib/index.js | ""

We could obtain submodule names by establishing conventions on monocdk's
directory structure, using rules as "ignore `/lib/` and replace `-` with `_`
to obtain the module name", for example. This reliance on convention seems
brittle and inflexible. Instead, let's use a configuration file.

#### jsii manifest

What about the jsii manifest? It contains the right module names already, and

> it seems to have a `locationInModule` entry that seems to do what we need:

Reviewer: This should go into a section called 'Alternatives Considered' so as to not muddy the proposed design.

```json
{
  "name": "Cluster",
  "namespace": "aws_eks",
  // ...
  "locationInModule": {
    "filename": "lib/aws-eks/lib/cluster.ts",
    "line": 685
  },
}
```

However, I don't think this is appropriate to use for the following reasons:

> Reading the jsii manifest ties us to using jsii in a way that I don't think

Author: I agree, but I'm not convinced it simplifies appreciably much. Since that's the case, I'd rather also not be tied to it to retain flexibility.

submodule information from. We should denormalize it into a separate
configuration file instead.

#### cdk-metadata.json

We will use an additional lookup table in a well-known file instead.

That lookup that can be generated by the monocdk build tool, which is in
charge of picking the submodule names and generating the submodule structure
anyway. The only thing it needs to do is record those decisions in an
additional file called `cdk-metadata.json`, which looks like this:

```json
{
  "submodules": {
    "lib/aws-ecs": "aws_ecs",
    "lib/aws-eks": "aws_eks",
    ...
  }
}
```

Absence of a directory in this list or an empty directory indicates no submodule name.

Currently, CDK core contains a hardcoded list of module names for which
metadata should be reported. We can make this an open opt-in protocol by
triggering this reporting off purely off of the presence of the `cdk-metadata.json`
file, which removes the need for the hard-coded names found here:

https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk/blob/1f7311f56457556a6f229e745cd24e3f1e5fe1d3/packages/%40aws-cdk/core/lib/private/runtime-info.ts#L5-L8

Other library vendors like the AWS Solutions Architects Team simply needs

> to add an empty `cdk-metadata.json` to their libraries to get metadata

Author: I don't really see the problem with an opt-in system.

* The data goes to us, so unless you've got a tie to us you're not reading it (and hence your reasons for opting in are zero).
* There's not really any security to speak of today, as the system is wide open and if anyone wants to spoof they're free to do so at any point, and there's not really anything we can do about it. Library-based opt-in or allow list in the core library doesn't change that.

At the same time, an open opt-in system will make it easier for other future construct vendors to onboard onto this system (especially internal construct vendors).

Will the mechanisms described here still work when a is client using the CDK
via jsii? The answer is yes.

When a jsii-enabled client is instantiating AWS constructs, the full original
library has been loaded into the NodeJS process and the files on disk
(`package.json` et al) match the disk layout we're expecting, so the
mechanism will work the same.

When a jsii-enabled client instantiates a foreign class we will not be able
to obtain a construct identifier for the class, but fortunately we're only
interested in AWS-vended constructs anyway and they will all be implemented
in TypeScript.

> Should we ever want to open this mechanism up to non-TypeScript libraries, an obvious
> mechanism is to introduce a well-known metadata tag that we can read a construct's
> construct identifier from (falling back to the default search algorithm if none
> is found). It becomes a library author's concern of how to attach the metadata
> then.

## Metadata resource encoding

Once we have the list of construct identifiers, we need to encode it into the metadata
resource.

The Metadata resource looks like this:

```yaml
Resources:
  CDKMetadata:
    Type: AWS::CDK::Metadata
    Properties:

>       Modules: <v1 module information, deprecated by this RFC>

Author: That makes sense. Feels like the receiver is able to do that.

We can encode the elements as a list straight in the template, but it will
take up a lot of space in the template: vertical space while looking at it,
as well as bytes that count toward the template size (maximum of 460kB).

### Compression

As an experiment, I've drawn 400 random class names from the complete list of class
names currently in monocdk; that set of class names comes to about 23kB (uncompressed).

Trying various methods of compression on it yields the following (keeping in mind
that the result of binary compression will need to be base64-encoded to transmit via
a CloudFormation template):

| Description                | Raw size    | Base64ed size |
|----------------------------|-------------|---------------|
| Plaintext                  | 23k         | -             |
| gzipped                    | 3.6k        | 4.8k          |
| Zopfli                     | 3.4k        | 4.6k          |
| bzip2                      | 3.4k        | 4.6k          |
| Prefix-grouped (plaintext) | 7.4k        | -             |
| Prefix-grouped gzipped     | 3.0k        | 4.0k          |
| Bloom Filter (1% error)    | 720b        | 960b          |

> Prefix-grouped, gzipped data seems to give the best results that are still

Reviewer: Assuming the same 400 constructs, this comes to 8% of the template if it were going inline (max 50K) as part of `createStack`, and <1% if the template was sent via S3 (max 450K).

I assume a template with 400 constructs cannot fit into the 50K limit anyway. I did a quick experiment and ~85 construct *instances* were needed to fill up to 50K. The actual construct types will be much lesser. 

The compression reached by prefix-grouped gzipped feels fine to me.

convenient and generic to work with (see Appendix 2 for a description of
prefix grouping).

See Appendix 3 for an example blob to be added to a template. I'm not super
happy with this, but this is the most straightfoward option available.

> 

Reviewer 4: Perhaps we can upload the analytics to S3 as an asset and allow our system to read it through cross-account access?

Author: I'm not keen on the operational/security overhead of a system where we will be able to read a user's buckets.

Author: Also we would lose the ability to deploy (small stacks) without bootstrapping.

If we are willing to do more work, we can achieve less space used up by doing
more esoteric things. One option would be to use a Bloom Filter, which can use
a configurable amount of storage to achieve a configurable hit error ratio.
For example, achieving about a 1% false positive rate would take on the order
of about ~1k base64-encoded bytes. However, in order to extract a construct list
from this Bloom Filter would be a considerable amount of work: we would need
a full list of all construct available in every library and at every version,
in order to test each construct's presence in the filter. This would destroy
the openness of the protocol, and is probably not worth it.

### Analytics payload

The analytics payload itself will be preceded by an encoding scheme identifier,
followed by a `:` and the transmitted data:

```yaml
Resources:
  CDKMetadata:
    Type: AWS::CDK::Metadata
    Properties:

>       Analytics: <payload-encoding>:<payload>

Reviewer: This comment is not addressed.

```

The only valid payload encodings at the moment are:

* `deflate64`: base64-encoded, gzipped data.
* `plain`: plaintext data.

The payload itself is a JSON object with `"constructs"` currently defined as the only
valid key (but can be extended in the future). Values can be prefixed with
an encoding scheme as well:

```json
{
  "constructs": "[<value-encoding>:]<prefix-encoded construct list>"
}
```

The only valid payload value encodings at the moment are:

* `prefix`: prefix-encoded string list (see Appendix 2).
* `plain`: plaintext data.

Encoding may change the type (the encoded value is a `string` but the decoded
value is a `string[]`).

> If a value does not start with > /^[a-z0-9]{,10}:/ it is considered to
> be not encoded (the encoding is considered to be "plain").

## Metadata resource decoding

Decoding will happen on the receiving end before the data hits long-term storage,
in order to make consuming it as trivial as possible. There is no need to be frugal

> with bits anymore once the data hits an AWS datacenter.

Reviewer: This comment is not addressed.

# Extensions

We will be able more information into additional fields of the metadata resource.
Size of template, number of resources are obvious candidates.

> 

Reviewer: There needs to be a section around end-to-end verification. 

How will we know when the data collection logic has an error (not counting or mis-counting), but none of our unit tests fail?

Reviewer: Please address this comment. 

Are we confident all parts of the system can be tested? Could we have a situation where metrics are not counted and we're flying blind?

How about e2e tests/canaries from specific accounts?

# Unresolved questions

- How acceptable is the giant base64-encoded blob in the template? If we want

>   to cut down on it, what clever strategies can we come up with?

Reviewer 4: assets?

Reviewer 4: Did you consider using assets?

# Implementation Plan

> This can be implemented in v1 already, no need to wait for v2.

Reviewer: Your RFC has v2 in it. It's confusing to say v1 and v2 again.

```suggestion
These changes are backwards compatible. There is no need to wait for CDKv2.
```
